Welcome, this is the 10th webcast of the PBC Morning Dawn Study Group from Padmasamy Ling Monastery
in New York.
Here we'll be discussing Chapter 10 of the Venerable Kheertility's book "The Buddhist Path".
Thanks so much for joining us. We'll begin with opening prayers, and then we'll go into our
discussion. Thanks so much.
[Singing in Tibetan]
Thanks again. So we'll begin this Chapter 10 of the Buddhist Path. I think it's on page 49.
And then I'll quickly just give a little overview leading up to this first topic point that we'll
discuss.
So in the first paragraph, paramiches say that according to Vajrayana or Tibetan Buddhism, there
are three principal aspects of the body.
And these are channels, wind, and essence elements. And in Tibetan that's sa, long, and tigle.
And among these three, the channels are the most important because if we balance the channels, then
the wind and the essence elements will become balanced as well.
And then the channels, or the nervous system, or meridians, are the root of the body.
And after conception, in baby's conception, the first thing that is formed are the channels.
First at the navel center, and then the channels to the two eyes are formed.
And the third paragraph that according to the inner tantras, the human body has three main channels
.
The central channel, and the right channel, and the left channel.
And then fourth paragraph, the four chakras, or wheels, of the channels are joined to these three
main channels.
And they are located in the four places of our body in our crown area, and then throat, heart, and
the navel.
So these are our four main chakras of human beings.
And then the three channels and four chakras are the basic ground of the body.
There are many other minor channels and chakras, and these form differently in different people.
And this is why different people have different experiences.
The formations of their chakras or their channels mainly are different.
And so different beings and different types of beings see things in a variety of ways because of
this structure of the channels and chakras are different.
And what we experience outwardly very much depends on the inner structures of our body, which
affects our mind.
And if we know more about our body and mind, then we won't be as confused when we experience
various external events.
So that's more or less the first half of the chapter.
And then, Lordra, if you'd read that first topic point.
According to the Tantric Buddhist system of all the aspects of the body, its bones, muscles, blood,
and so on,
the three principal aspects are the channels, the wings, and the essence element.
The channels are the most important because they carry the wind, which moves the essence element
throughout the body.
When the channels are perfectly balanced, then the wind energy and the essence element are also
balanced.
The three channels in the four chakras are the basic ground of the body.
They are the source and the main condition for all of one's experiences and sense consciousness.
In all human beings, the three major channels in the four chakras are basically structured in the
same way.
However, the minor channels are formed differently in different people.
Because of differences in the minor channels, people have different personalities, different ways
of talking, acting, and different experiences.
Page 49, first paragraph, and page 51, the second paragraph.
Thank you.
Well, I had just a brief question before we move into the details.
So now all of a sudden we have channels in the winds and the essence elements.
So have we seen this before, anywhere else, in the other yanas, like the Hinayana and the Mahayana
teachings up to this point?
Because I think this is Chapter 10, right?
So now we're just rushing on the scene with the body or body.
So where do these appear in the other teachings?
In the other teachings in this book?
And depending on the frame of view you're taking, particularly when it seems like this chapter is
adding,
is that here's some physical components to take with you.
So particularly the way Rinpoche was stressing in here, when you bring a straightness and a balance
to the body,
that's going to help not only straighten the channels but then the winds and the essence, all of
that balances.
And it seems like even that itself goes off the earlier chapters of taming the mind and the causes
and conditions of the mind.
Even though I don't think the channels were referenced before, it seems like a different view on
that same core.
All of these practices are going to taming the mind.
And I think this is now more of a physical element to take with it.
And so I would go off of what you're saying, Lojo, and just say that I think definitely Rinpoche
has talked previously in this book about body, of course.
So body, speech, and mind, we all have that.
And so they've definitely talked about taming the body.
And here I think they're introducing a more subtle level of body.
And this is specific definitely to Vajrayana or Tibetan Buddhism.
Specifically I think the inner Tantra teachings of the Buddha and Guru Rinpoche.
And so I think there's a subdivision between the more common apparent way that we experience form
or body.
And then there's a more subtle energy or a more subtle type of form.
And then both outwardly and then also specifically these chapters dealing with the more subtle
structures of our bodies.
And so in a Vajrayana context, that's talking about a body is a relative thing.
So in terms of relative and absolute truth, it's talking about the part of relative truth of the
body.
And then specifically in the Vajrayana context,
it's talking about how that relative truth is experienced more as in a balanced or pure way, an
enlightened way.
The way enlightened beings experience that.
So it could be called the pure relative truth or the pure way in which this more subtle level
energy
or structure of the body is experienced by enlightened beings.
Whether we see it or not, these great masters are saying this is the structure of our body.
And if we look at it closely, then we can experience that for ourselves too.
And maybe similar as it relates to the whole body of the Buddhist teachings too.
Both the points touch on it, so I think we'll touch on it in both of the two main points here.
But even like with interdependent origination, which is like from the very beginning of the
Buddhist teachings.
How just all of those, because really the channels and the winds, there are the karmic effects.
So it's again on this deeper level, looking at our experience and using that as in the process of t
aming the mind
and revealing our Buddha nature and everything.
I think that the 12 links is one way from the beginning.
Of course it may not specifically, the Buddha maybe didn't talk specifically about the winds and
channels
but if we look from the viewpoint of them, we can see how that is within the 12 links.
Like it just becomes more and more profound or inclusive.
What do you think?
In terms of where it's located or how, why, so we're on chapter 10, it just almost, do you think it
kind of pops out of the blue in the book?
I mean it's definitely a very specific topic.
Yeah, in the book it does, but I think I don't know if the book is from a series of lectures or one
continuous teaching or compilation.
But just like what you guys said too, it's a full spectrum thing.
Whatever you practice, you're not disembodied.
You're rooted, it's rooted in the body and I think it's really nice to hear how they're just
highlighting
our inner experience of practice of the Dharma on a mental level is so intimately related with our,
even our physical experience on the subtle levels and the gross levels, so that's pretty cool.
And so far, in a way, maybe even this chapter on, I mean they're all talking about ways we can
apply,
but it seems like the first few chapters are giving kind of a view and a lot of the really
essential qualities that are good to connect with that are related to the nature.
And then maybe, like now we're starting to see more looking at how the channels and winds, because
this is a Vajrayana book from the inner tantras, which of course include all the nine yamas.
But then maybe the chapters after here are talking specific techniques and things we're looking at
in Tibetan Buddhist Tantra practice.
So maybe that's it, kind of making that move closer to actual practices and things directly in our
experience.
There's this chapter, like the second chapter that causes and conditions of the mind, I was just
kind of looking back at that, but that's almost like, it could be like an introduction to this
chapter.
People are kind of wanting to get a basic groundwork to maybe reread that second chapter, because
it does talk about how our consciousness connects with the elements from our parents and then just
basically a little bit about the body.
But of course in this chapter it's more into the subtle details of that.
I think too just a really quick, important point though, is that since this is, we are moving into
the Vajrayana and the techniques of the Vajrayana and how to see the Vajrayana body.
It seems like Rinpoche has really emphasized that at this point, we're not doing this as a means to
gain some special...
It's not a yoga in the strict sense of, maybe that's the wrong word, but it's not an exercise.
We're actually getting into ways to work with the body on this deep level that's rooted in our bodh
icitta motivation, in our pure perception of the Vajrayana.
It seems like Rinpoche has emphasized this over and over again, and they've shed on the ani-yoga.
How the basis of all this is within the context of refuge, bodhicitta.
When you practice on these things and with these techniques, which they don't go into so much
detail in this chapter, but that's our foundation.
That's always our foundation, and if that's not our foundation, then it's not Buddhism and it's not
a liberative technique from that perspective.
When you asked that question during the Shirda of Aum Yoga too, what's the difference between
exercise as just a yogic discipline and a liberative...
What makes it lead to enlightenment, working with the channels, wins and ends and so on?
Thank you all. I think that puts a nice context.
I think there was, just to go right off that, if it's all right, that specifically Rinpoche has
definitely mentioned that practices that relate to this more inner subtle structures,
like they relate to the channels and they relate to the winds, that these existed before the Buddha
Shakyamuni came.
In India, they had been very well established.
In addition, like mantra recitation, like these more subtle level practices that are also
incorporated in Buddha's teachings of the Vashriyana or Tibetan Buddhism,
like Trulkor, these exercises with channels, or Salaam, the exercises with winds, that those
existed prior to the Buddha coming and teaching a complete path to enlightenment.
And so, specifically regarding your point, that it is what made those practices, or what made us
being able to use these subtle structures, actually a vehicle for enlightenment,
that we could manifest our own Buddha nature and help others do that too.
And it's just those points you said, this motivation, this renunciation, and then based on that,
then a bodhicitta, like refuge in bodhicitta.
And then also, like that Buddha teaching, that emptiness nature, which we've talked about many
times in these other chapters,
of the Shammatava Pasha and I are looking directly at the nature of the mind, not just its own kind
of dualistic karmic grasping tendencies.
But it's really good, as this topic is introduced, because it's so subtle, like, and for a lot of
us, it's subtle that we can just have, we can only read about it.
Like, we're not really directly experiencing it much, or we haven't done many practices with it, so
we don't really know personally in our experience.
But it's just to say that, specifically, like, these techniques are in other traditions, but what
makes them part of the Buddhist tradition,
and how Buddha specifically taught about them, is that there's a bodhicitta motivation, some degree
of recognition of emptiness,
and based on those two principle foundations, then we're also being in touch with these subtle
structures that are actually, that the Buddha says are actually there in our body, right here and
now.
And so, I thought to just go, kind of elaborate a little more on that point you said, which is, it
's important to see.
No, I'm kind of going off of what was being said, but when I was reading through this, you know,
there was, you know, I think they're going into it a little bit more in the next chapter,
because I peeked and went ahead a little bit, where they're talking about posture and the breath
purification.
But I also, you know, some of the ways they're talking in here, like, for people who are reading
this chapter, and maybe a little bit newer,
like, maybe, what are some of the more practical takeaways from this?
You know, because, like, they're specifically talking about being conscious of the winds, being
conscious of the body, and holding the body, you know, straight.
So, I don't know, maybe, what were some of the more, like, practical things that people could take
away from this now,
and how they reflect more physically on the practice?
Yeah, so, maybe not going into the divine yoga teachings.
I think maybe this, I mean, it struck me, it's kind of, in one way it's just, it's simple and
straight forward, so maybe that's why it could be practical,
as far as, page 52, the middle paragraph thing, talking about the breath specifically.
Right.
Talking about how the breath, or wind energy, is an important element of the body, because it
communicates between the outside and the inside of the body.
Yeah.
And our whole body, as well as consciousness, relies upon the breath.
So, I mean, to me that seems like pretty, most people can relate to the fact that they're breathing
, and that's their way of maybe,
but that point is really nice, it's how, our breath is how we're communicating with the outer world
and our inner world,
and the importance of that, and, like, kind of understanding that, you know, maybe, you know, we
all have had an experience of when our energy is,
or we're feeling, like, really anxious or something, or when it's very calm, and how our breath
changes.
So, in a way that's, it's very, I think it's very profound, of course, on one level and another
level.
It is something maybe practical that someone just reading this or coming into it could work with,
or think about, contemplate.
And even when somebody's upset, and they say, "Oh, breathe deep, breathe deep, calm down," and as
you breathe deep,
then your mind calms, because they're related.
Well, I was wondering about the kind of implications of this for the existence of outside objects,
and so maybe it could tie in a little bit with emptiness, too.
If it's all, you know, from the channels, or how much of it is from the channels, winds and wind.
Can you clarify what you mean? Is that, like, what you were experiencing on our perceptions?
Is that what you're talking about? Yeah, if we think of, like, this table,
how much of this is from each of our own channels, winds, and things like that.
You know, Rinpoche's, in a way, say that.
In the chapter here, they talk about how, in the Buddhist teachings,
it's really these fundamental, deeper, in a way habitual patterns of the winds and the channels,
are the way the channels are aligned and working, and how smooth they are,
how balanced, and the particular ways they intermesh and have juncture, and all of that definitely
affects.
So we are all human beings, and we all share very similar karma,
and that's why, like, our three main channels are, like they say, the most the same,
but then there's subtle differences, you know,
and then, including, they talk about how, in, like, the different realms,
there's even particular colors that are more emphasized, or different abilities,
and then, obviously, different kinds of bodies, and things like that,
are all reflections of these habitual, deeper levels of, you know,
all coming from the mind, and then reflecting out,
and then, you know, so our experience of our body and our world
is definitely related to how the channels are aligned in the teachings.
And then, just on that level of just how the whole point of what Buddha bringing means up
is as a means of just harmonizing and balancing the body, speech, and mind, even,
and that's very too simplistic, but that's what it really comes back to, it seems,
and that due to the fact everything is open and able to change and move,
then definitely work on kind of just bringing things to a natural balance,
and this sort of paying attention to that is all part of that, our posture, our breath.
I mean, definitely we go on in the later chapters when we talk about meditation
and posture and the breath purification and mantra, and again, again,
this is like a kind of basis setting, Rinpoche setting all the foundations
to understanding the Tibetan Buddhist practice.
And that's it, maybe, should we kind of merge into the second point,
or, I mean, I want to, maybe, could I say something before we go on?
Just related to what you said, and one else's question is that,
like what you said in terms of harmonizing body, speech, and mind,
another way to say that is to have a balance between relative truth and absolute truth.
So this is a core, essential teaching of the Buddha, even in, like, Sutra Mahayana,
Heart Sutra, for example, form is emptiness, emptiness is form,
form is none other than emptiness, and emptiness is none other than form.
It's always a union of the two truths, so there's always relative and absolute.
It doesn't only just end up being emptiness,
or only being relative apparent expression, either.
So in the terms of this more subtle level of structure, with sa and lung,
or with channel and wind, this is relative,
but it's more subtle than what we're usually dealing with.
So in terms of, there's always a relative expression.
It's a key teaching of the Buddha. It never ends up just being empty space.
So there always is a relative appearance,
and there's degrees of subtlety in those relative appearances.
There's giant planets, and there's more medium-sized people and objects,
and there's more subtle level buzzing of atomic structure,
and there's subtler subatomic structure,
and this is more saying that when the mind is more balanced,
it can also see this very subtle way in which relative phenomena function,
and that specifically channels and wind and essence element.
So in one way it's saying that there's always going to be this apparent relative aspect to things,
even if that apparent relative aspect is the mind and its movement.
There's always a movement and expressiveness,
and then there's a question of how does it move.
So there's ways it moves through channels or junctures,
or you can describe these patterns.
There's like relative truth is always patterned because of causality, cause and effect.
And so it's just to say, yeah, that I think this is on the relative side,
that's in union with emptiness side, with emptiness for sure,
but it's a subtle level relative truth that's there and available
for anyone to investigate and look into if they so want to, just like any science.
You have to look into something and investigate it to see this subtler level structure.
Otherwise there's no way we ever know that water is made of H2O, which is we won't know.
So it's saying that this is there and there is this subtle level relative truth aspect,
which is unavoidable.
Whether if it's gross level relative truth, subtle level, and the end doesn't really matter,
but it's saying if you're interested in also seeing this subtler level relative truth,
and that's helpful for you on a path of enlightenment,
then it litigate all these teachings about here's this subtle level structure
and here are techniques you can use to be in touch with them
and relate, have your mind express its goodness qualities that way too.
And this is a huge topic, your question.
You too.
And is it general, just one additional point.
Generally in these teachings on the channels, the winds and essence elements,
like from say, ama yoga, they say the physical, the vajra body,
those components of the body are like a mirror image of the external world
and the external world is like a mirror image of the internal physical system too,
including like the sun and the moon and the stars and the planets and all the alignment.
So as within, so without kind of thing.
So the more you purify your own perceptions in your own karmic vision,
so that it travels through the channels and the winds
and the unimpeded way of wisdom,
instead of just normal ordinary diluted karmic habit patterns through the channels,
then that external appearance of phenomena actually changes from that individual's perspective.
So even though they can recognize the table as a table,
the wisdom element of that refined pure perception of like the vajrayana,
the subtle level of pure relative truth starts to become more and more apparent.
So it's like by working with ones online and the physical system and the physical body,
from the individual's perspective, the external phenomenal world
actually seems like it's being purified.
It's innate and pure according to the vajrayana, it's already pure.
But from our perspective, we don't see it that way.
This huge topic, what is it?
Amazingly profound, and the aniyoga scriptures too are now like the most
fullest expression of all the sahana and all the tantric teachings.
They say some of the aniyoga practices, is the vajrayana the most refined pinnacle
of all the vajrayana ritual and practice wise is found in aniyoga.
It's really profound and deep.
Well, the second point.
That's the short answer.
I think I'll do a summary thing real quick and then do the second one.
So, this is picking up paragraph seven that by balancing the channels,
we balance our wind, we balance the wind energy or our breath.
Since everything relies on the wind energy to happen, including the mind,
and this will balance the mind and also our perceptions.
Then they compare like this second topic, the body to the earth,
the channels to roads, the wind to a horse and the mind to a rider.
And I think we're also going to pick up that quote here in a minute.
The Nurbiches go on to say,
"The purpose of meditation is to bring everything into a natural balance,
and therefore it's important to know how channels affect the body
and how wind affects the mind.
So every moment of consciousness rides the wind energy.
Our wind energy affects how we experience time as well.
And there are two types of wind.
There's karmic wind and then wisdom wind.
Now karmic wind is based on negative emotions and obscurations,
and wisdom wind is free from ignorance,
so free from negative emotions and obscurations.
And while most of the breathing and breaths we experience
are based on these negative habitual patterns or karmic winds,
there are like regular wisdom winds that also happen in our system
and that they can be calculated in a specific way.
But more if we get in touch to that wind system in ourselves,
it becomes easier to recognize when that wisdom wind happens
as a natural process in our body,
and that by recognizing that more easily,
then we can extend that recognition and have that wisdom wind energy
last for longer and longer periods of time.
And so that will keep our winds more balanced,
our channels more balanced, our body more balanced.
In Zochen, they talk about these four levels of straightness related to this.
And we've talked about this a little, keeping the body straight
affects keeping the channel straight, which keeps the winds balanced or straight,
which makes the dualistic mind straight, which reveals the innate primordial wisdom.
And then they kind of conclude the chapter by saying that samsara is not straight at all,
that it is always circling back on itself, and so this is known as the wheel of life,
this constant korwa, or succession of wondering,
and that based on our own ignorance and attachment, which leads to anger,
we continually cycle and circle within this unbalanced system.
And so one way of rebalancing our system is to be in touch with these channels
and winds and essence elements in our mind,
and that actually will straighten or balance our own experience,
and then we'll become free of this cycling, of suffering,
and become enlightened and reveal these goodness qualities we have.
So that's the whole chapter.
Then, Ross, if you do that topic to you.
In the Vajrayana teachings, there is a well-known example
for the relationship between the body, the channels, the wind, and the mind.
The body is like the ground or the earth.
The channels are like the roads.
The wind is like a horse.
And the mind or consciousness is like a person who is riding the horse.
If the horse is wild, the person is carried in all directions,
wherever the horse ends up going.
Similarly, if the wind is unbalanced,
the consciousness is carried by the wind through all the channels of the body.
But if the wind element is tamed, then the mind that rides on the wind is tamed as well.
Page 52, Third Full Paragraph.
It's just a classic metaphor, then, if we can remember that, those points.
Body, channels, wind, mind, how they relate.
It really lines up the teachings so beautifully,
especially these more subtle-level teachings, I mean.
Practically, this seems like it has important implications for formal meditation
versus post-meditation.
Because sometimes you hear people,
generally for beginners, when they say, "Oh, I practice while I'm doing whatever.
I meditate while I'm doing this and that."
Well, this is just a reminder, too, that to keep the body still can be really helpful.
To sit, be quiet, let the winds calm down, let the speech calm down,
let the mind calm down, engage in the practice from that.
From that place, and then that will carry it.
And then you can use that momentum to carry out through your daily activities.
But just how it's an important point to use that as a support for you
as you engage in different other activities.
And the way it relates to it, even the levels of just the conditions of setting up good conditions
for things to just be healthy and more natural and simple and in balance more.
So the way posture relates to that, whether you're meditating or not,
what food you eat or the conditions you put in,
just how any way of setting up good conditions for things to flow naturally.
I was just thinking about this metaphor they're using about the ground, the roads, the wind, the
horse and the mind.
Because they keep also talking about how important it is to have the straight posture.
And so then having straight posture means that our channels are straight.
And so the channels are the roads.
In a way, I was just thinking, even if our mind may have a tendency to be wild by straightening the
road,
at least it kind of starts to direct it from there.
And then we can work with our breath.
So at least it's not like this way and that way.
So just again, how important posture really is.
I also was just thinking that in terms of what you asked earlier about for beginners.
Just really the importance of posture and working with that and then the breath.
Those are simple, very profound ways that we can really begin to tame that wild horse rider.
I definitely agree with you, Andrew.
It does give a great level of importance to having that formalized meditation where you're
maintaining good posture.
And at the same time, as you're saying, it gives that reminder that mindfulness of how we use our
body in our day-to-day life.
It's also providing that nice foundation.
Maybe not foundation, but providing a nice space for the practice to carry off the cushion as well
as the good on the cushion.
And carrying it forward as well.
Is there time for a question?
I was just wondering on page 53, the top of 53, they talk about how the wind and time.
And I just was wondering if anyone had any thoughts about that.
It was a little bit confusing for me thinking about the watch that you wear is like a duplicate of
your pulse.
I'm late for a very important date.
It's like time to say hello, goodbye. I'm late, I'm late.
Anything else to say?
I don't know. I get what you mean.
I think if I'm not mistaken, because we were also talking before about taking that deep, calm
breath.
It seems like it relates to it on that level too, where when you have the healthy winds, they're
moving at that pulse-like quality.
But if you're rather agitated, your pulse kind of rockets too.
It's those indicators it seems, but I don't know what you think.
Wind is movement. As far as the pulse, wind is movement.
Anything in the whole universe that's moving is the wind element.
That aspect of the fire, the wind, the air, the wind.
So it's like any time you move, the wind is what makes that possible in the channels.
Otherwise, they say without wind, it just wouldn't be possible to even have that.
So would you make the jump then to say that if the winds are wild, that our sense of time would be
rapid or fast?
And vice versa, like when the winds are calm, that our sense of time is more expanded and slow?
Spacious, regulated, rhythmic, matching up with other things balanced?
Even day to day, if you have a very go-go-go-go-go kind of day, you get to the end and you're
usually like,
"What the heck just happened and when did it happen?"
That kind of a thing, whereas if you're going to have a nice, calm and peaceful day, it doesn't
feel as harried.
That's not particularly practice speaking as much as going crazy in the kitchen speaking from
experience.
I think this is as esoteric as this might be, this topic.
We really experience this all the time in our lives.
One really clear example is such a rushed culture.
This time is so busy, there's a tension, there's a pressure to achieve all the time.
There's just this rapid pulse.
I think people feel that.
I definitely feel that.
Just to talk about it in this context, that's wind.
It's at tightened channels.
It's things that aren't as open and confident.
It's just more twisted and tight and narrow and that's all related to inner level structure
and how our breathing is so shallow and how we have to always just caffeinate and get supercharged
and overcome in impractical ways.
It's almost as if we're beyond our bodies and we can just overcome physical limitations
if we just push it hard enough.
These teachings are very clearly saying it's not really that way.
We can do a lot if we become more sensitive to these patterns in ourselves.
Because we're already sensitive to these patterns in ourselves.
Why do we have coffee right when we get up?
Because we're sensitive to that pattern.
Maybe we're a little unconscious about it.
At the same time, this point is that while Rinpoche has to really talk about this subtle level
structure
and this isn't just Rinpoche, but the Buddha and Rinpoche too.
They also said that because we all have this primordial nature,
we don't have to use these subtle level practices like of this Trulkor and Salong
and all these subtle level practices that because we have that pure nature already,
we can directly connect to that nature.
That's called Drolang, right?
Liberative practice, directly connecting to the nature.
But as a path, to do that, for a lot of people,
it's more practical to also incorporate our energy, our subtle level structure
because it's hard to just directly connect to something regardless of the conditions.
It's really high level, hard to do.
There's this whole system of connecting to this subtle level structure, body,
which is a gross level body, and then using those as a way to ground
and create proper causes and conditions for the mind to become more balanced
and have that nature be revealed.
So while it says it doesn't have to be done, it is there, the subtle level energy,
that we're all aware of the subtle level things.
It's pulsing or just subtle or level.
And it can be utilized in ways that are helpful to bring balance to our mind
and are more helpful for ourselves and others too.
Thank you.
Thanks everyone.
[Music]
By this merit, may all obtain omissions.
May it defeat the enemy wrongdoing.
From the stormy waves of earth, old age, sickness and death.
From the ocean of samsara, may I free all beings.
The preface for the cheetah and those without it may it be generated.
And those who have it may it never diminish, but always continue increasing.